docs:add multi-languages structure (#941)
cloudevents/spec: languages/README.md

# Instructions for CloudEvents Specification in Multi-languages

<!-- no verify-specs -->

## Abstract

> This page contains information about how to translate a document from scratch, definition of roles and responsibilities 

Reviewer: can you wrap things at 80 columns?

as well as guidelines that translators and maintainers should follow.

## Status of this document

This is a working draft. Changes could be made anytime.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Roles](#roles)
- [How to translate](#how-to-translate)
- [Translation style guide](#translation-style-guide)

## Overview

We welcome you to join us and contribute to the CloudEvents spec!

CloudEvents is a specification for describing event data in common formats to provide interoperability across services, platforms and systems.
An increasing number of developers are becoming interested in CloudEvents.
We encourage you to translate the spec into a specific language since the language barrier might hinder the spread of CloudEvents.

This page contains information about how to translate a document from scratch, definition of roles and responsibilities
as well as guidelines that translators and maintainers should follow.

## Roles

There are two categories of roles:

1. **Translator.** This is anyone who participates in the translation of any
   CloudEvents documents. One becomes a formal translator once a Pull Request(PR) of his/her translation is merged.

> 2. **Maintainer.** A maintainer is responsible for checking new translation, 

Reviewer: I'm not sure we need formal roles since a "Maintainer" role doesn't really exist in the sense that they can't merge PRs. Is there any reason we can't just treat these PRs like any other PR that the group processes?

Reviewer: Perhaps what you really mean to call these are "reviewers" or "approvers"? We can certainly make it so the group doesn't merge a PR until these folks give their LGTM

Author: Yeah, the role I thought is more like to be  a "language reviewer" who should check the translation and leave a LGTM before group merge that PR. I'll change it now.

# Instructions for CloudEvents Specification in Multi-languages

<!-- no verify-specs -->

## Abstract

This page contains information about how to translate a document from scratch, 
definition of roles and responsibilities as well as guidelines that translators 
and reviewers should follow.

## Status of this document

This is a working draft. Changes could be made anytime.

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Roles](#roles)
- [How to translate](#how-to-translate)
- [Translation style guide](#translation-style-guide)

> ## Overview

Author: ```
- [How to translate](#how-to-translate)
- [Translation style guide](#translation-style-guide)
```
Delete these two lines?

> ## Overview

Reviewer: I think he means: delete the "overview" section. Right @jskeet ?

> ## Overview

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's correct.

> ## Overview

Author: "Overview" section is deleted now.

We welcome you to join us and contribute to the CloudEvents spec!

CloudEvents is a specification for describing event data in common formats to 
provide interoperability across services, platforms and systems. An increasing 
number of developers are becoming interested in CloudEvents. We encourage you 
to translate the spec into a specific language since the language barrier might 
hinder the spread of CloudEvents.

This page contains information about how to translate a document from scratch, 
definition of roles and responsibilities as well as guidelines that translators 
and reviewers should follow.

## Roles

There are two categories of roles:

1. **Translator.** This is anyone who participates in the translation of any 
   CloudEvents documents. One becomes a formal translator once a Pull Request(PR) 
   of his/her translation is merged.

2. **Reviewer.** A reviewer is responsible for checking new translation, ensuring 
   translation up to date as English version changed and answering related issues.
   A translation will not be merged until reviewers give their LGTM.

>    Check current reviewers [here](reviewers.md).

Author: Yep,  a  Github team maybe a good choice for reviewers.  Worth discussion at meeting.

  That happens when a reviewer explicitly give up the role or has not performed 
  reviewer duties over 2 weeks.

## How to translate

### Step 1. Check the Languages.md
First, fork [cloudevents/spec](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/tree/main) 
to your Github repo. Then check the[languages.md](languages.md)to see if the language 
you'd like to translate into already exists. If it exists, add new translation under 
`languages/$(your-language-code)/$(corresponding-position)`. 
For example:
```
cloudevents/spec.md should be translated as languages/zh-cn/cloudevents/spec.md
cloudevents/adapters/github.md should be translated as languages/zh-cn/cloudevents/adapters/github.md
*****NOTE: documents under languages directory should not be translated ***** 
```
If your language doesn't exist, add a new item to the [languages.md](languages.md) file, 
which links to a newly-created directory named after the corresponding language code within 
[language codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_localisation#Language_tags_and_codes). 
Then, add new translation to right position as described above.

### Step 2. choose which document you'd like to translate

> A translator can know about which documents are not translated yet by reading a 

Author: I re-org the languages structure. There is a `translations.md` under `languages/{code}/` now.

"CE translation list".

The list looks like this:

![CloudEvents translation list](CE_translation_list.png)

> - version: choose from {`finished`, `working draft`}; a translator should always 

Reviewer 2: Even "finished" documents in English can change though. I think we'll want some sort of tracking for "the version that was last translated".

Author: I added last edit time in `languages/{language-code}/translations.md` to see when that document was last translated.
Initially, the last edit time will be the time when the translation PR is merged.
Reviewers should ensure translations are up-to-date as original one changes. And then they update the last edit time.

    - PR merged: the translation is successfully merged in the spec. 
      
The file `languages/$(your-language-code)/translate.md` will hold the link of the 
"CE translation list".

If the file `languages/$(your-language-code)/translate.md` doesn't exist, 
then you should:

- Copy [translate-sample.md](translate-sample.md) to `languages/$(your-language-code)/translate.md`
- Copy the "CE translation sample list" and create a new one for you. Then replace the sample sheet 
  link with the new sheet link you just created.
- Change the access right to "Anyone on the internet with this link can edit" so that every potential 
  translator could directly choose a document to translate.
- It doesn't matter which language you're using to write `languages/$(your-language-code)/translate.md`. 
  However, it must contain the link of the "CE translation list" with access right as "everyone can edit".

### Step 3. submit your translation
A translator must submit translation via submitting a Pull Request. See details in how to 
[submit a Pull Request](../community/CONTRIBUTING.md#suggesting-a-change).

## Translation style guide

> - Only translate textual documents(generally md files). Other format documents(.json, .yaml, .g4) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Only translate textual documents (generally Markdown files with a .md extension). Other document formats (.json, .yaml, .g4) 
```

>   will not be translated.

Reviewer 2: But they should presumably be copied into the directory without translation, right? That would be good to call out.

Author: Yep, non-textual documents will be copied to the right location, but not translated.

## Table of Contents

- [Roles](#roles)
- [How to translate](#how-to-translate)
- [How to add a new language](#how-to-add-a-new-language)
- [How to publish translation tasks](#how-to-publish-translation-tasks)  
- [Translation style guide](#translation-style-guide)

## Roles

There are two categories of roles:

1. **Translator.** This is anyone who participates in the translation of any 
   CloudEvents documents. One becomes a formal translator once a Pull Request (PR) 
   of their translation is merged.

2. **Reviewer.** A reviewer is responsible for checking new translations 
   and answering related issues.
   Typically, reviewers of each language are members of a Github team which is named 
   after the language code(i.e., zh-CN reviewers).

### Translators

A translator can start translating by following [the translation instructions](#how-to-translate).
Translators should follow the [translation style guide](#translation-style-guide).

### Reviewers

Anyone, who builds [a new language structure](#how-to-add-a-new-language), will be the first reviewer
of that language.

Reviewers should track translation state of each document by editing 

> `languages/{language-code}/translations.md` file.

Reviewer: Is it going to be a pain to have to submit a PR to edit this doc? I'm wondering if we should use a google doc and then we can easily add people to give them edit access.

Reviewer: actually, I guess you're assuming that they'll edit this doc in the same PR as the newly edited files, right? If so, ignore my comment :-)

There are 4 types of status:
- Ready to start: any document is ready to be translated stay in this state.
- Started: indicating someone is translating this document
- PR reviewing: a translator finished the translation, and the work is being reviewed.

> - PR merged: the translation is successfully merged into the spec.

Reviewer: s/spec/`spec` repository/

Initially, the last edit time will be the time when the translation is merged.
Reviewers should ensure translations are up-to-date with the English version as it changes, meanwhile 
update the last edit time as well. 

The following rules govern adding and removing reviewers:

- Reviewers can be proposed via a PR to edit the `languages/{language-code}/reviewer.md` file.

- Reviewers can be removed via a PR to edit the `languages/{language-code}/reviewer.md` file.

## How to add a new language 

This section is mainly for anyone who needs to build a new language structure.

Firstly, check the [language list](languages.md) to see if the language
you'd like to translate into already exists. If it doesn't exist, 
and there is not a PR indicating someone is currently working on it,
then you can start to add a new one.

### Step 1. Create a PR to edit the languages.md

> Before starting doing any actual works, you should create a PR to edit the

Reviewer: Before starting to do any actual work,

[language list](languages.md), adding a new language item to avoid redundant works from others.

### Step 2. Build the structure locally

After you cloned the repo to your local environment, you should create a directory 
under `languages` directory, named after the specific 
[language code](http://www.lingoes.net/en/translator/langcode.htm).

Then, copy all original documents except `languages` directory to `languages/{language-code}`.

*Note*: there is no need to copy project-related files(i.e.,LICENSE, OWNERS).

For example:
```
copy cloudevents/spec.md to languages/zh-CN/cloudevents/spec.md
copy README.md to languages/zh-CN/README.md
......
```
You should also clear English content of copied documents to indicate 
that the document is ready to be translated.

The [reviewer list](zh-CN/reviewers.md) and the [translation list](zh-CN/translations.md)
should be copied to `languages/{language-code}`.

### Step 3. Create a new PR to upload the new structure

Once you finished build the structure locally, you can create a PR to upload the changes.

## How to translate

### Step 1. Choose a document to translate 

> A translator can find a document to translate by filtering issues based on 

Reviewer: when are these issues opened? who opens them? This is the first mention of "issues" in this doc.
I wonder if it would be easier for them to look at the existing languages/{language-code}/translations.md files and see which ones are available

Author: I used to think about having an admin to open issues. Let's say if we find it would be better to have a Chinese(or any other language) translation during a meeting. Then any volunteered admin can start open issues to publish translation task.
But it seems to be a lot works for admins, I'm not sure if this's a good way for others. I'd be happy to do such kind of works.
Or we can just let translators check `translations.md`, but they might see some outdated states of files.

- PR merged: the translation is successfully merged into the spec.

Initially, the last edit time will be the time when the translation is merged.
Reviewers should ensure translations are up-to-date with the English version as it changes, meanwhile 
update the last edit time as well. 

The following rules govern adding and removing reviewers:

- Reviewers can be proposed via a PR to edit the `languages/{language-code}/reviewer.md` file.

- Reviewers can be removed via a PR to edit the `languages/{language-code}/reviewer.md` file.

## How to add a new language 

This section is mainly for anyone who needs to build a new language structure.

Fork [cloudevents/spec](https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/tree/main)
to your Github repo. 

Then check the [language list](languages.md) to see if the language
you'd like to translate into already exists. If it doesn't exist, you can start to add a new one.

### Step 1. build the structure

Create a directory under `languages` directory, named after the specific 
[language code](http://www.lingoes.net/en/translator/langcode.htm).

Add a new item to the [language list](languages.md), which linking to the directory 

> you just created. 

Reviewer: I assume this means create a new PR just to edit this md file, right? We should say that, and have them do it immediately before they do any real work so they can stop someone else from starting in parallel

Author: > I assume this means create a new PR just to edit this md file, right? 

Yes. And I'll clearly describe how to do it here.

### Step 2. copy documents to right location

> Copy all original documents except `languages` directory to `languages/{language-code}`.

Reviewer: It's not clear to me if this is just a "local task done on their laptop" or if you mean for them to create a PR to upload the English versions of the files into github?

Author: This step should end up with a PR to upload English versions of the files(maybe empty files) into GitHub.
They should copy English version files to right location and clear the content locally.
And finally submit a PR to upload local changes (new structure) into GitHub.

There is no need to copy project-related files(i.e.,LICENSE, OWNERS).

For example:
```
copy cloudevents/spec.md to languages/zh-CN/cloudevents/spec.md
copy README.md to languages/zh-CN/README.md
```

Clear content of copied documents to indicate that the document is ready to be translated.

Then copy the [reviewer list](zh-CN/reviewers.md) and the [translation list](zh-CN/translations.md)
to `languages/{language-code}`.

Check example structure [here](zh-CN).

## How to publish translation tasks

> ### Step 1. open a single issue referring to an untranslated document

Reviewer: s/open/Open/

> Create an issue with label "{language-code}-translation" to publish a translation assignment.

Reviewer: I think only admins can create labels. We may need to limit people to creating issues and updating the first comment in the issue to indicate their status

Author: I think I can remove the whole Section `How to publish translation tasks`.
That seems like something admins should do rather than reviewers.
So that reviewers are only responsible for building a new language structure(only the first reviewer will do it), and reviewing.

Examples:
```
Issue tile:        docs: translate cloudevents/spec.md to zh-CN
Issue content:   
                   original document: 
                   https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/README.md
                   target document: 
                   https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/languages/zh-CN/README.md
```

A reviewer can assign the issue to anyone who comments to do the translation.

> ### Step 2. open an overall issue to list and track all tasks

Reviewer: s/open/Open/

Reviewer: is this a different issue from step 1?

Author: Yes they're different. We should open an issue referring to every single untranslated document. In other words, we open 10 single issues if there are 10 untranslated docs. Every step 1 issue contains information about `original document` and `target document`.  Generally speaking it'll look like this:
```
Issue tile:        docs: translate cloudevents/spec.md to zh-CN
Issue content:   
                   original document: 
                   https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/README.md
                   target document: 
                   https://github.com/cloudevents/spec/blob/main/languages/zh-CN/README.md

```
As for step 2 issue, there should be only 1 that kind of overall issue. It provides an overall view to all step 1 issues.
So, it might look like this:
```
Issue tile:         docs:  translation issues list
Issue content:   
                    cloudevents: 
                    Issue 1 url
                    Issue 2 url
                    Issue 3 url
     
                    cesql: 
                    Issue 4 url
                    Issue 5 url
                    Issue 6 url

                    ......
```

Examples:
```
Issue tile:         docs: translation list to zh-CN
Issue content:   
                    cloudevents: 
                    Issue url: docs: translate cloudevents/spec.md to zh-CN
                    Issue url: docs: translate cloudevents/SDK.md to zh-CN
                    Issue url: docs: translate cloudevents/primer.md to zh-CN
     
                    cesql: 
                    Issue url: docs: translate cesql/spec.md to zh-CN
                    Issue url: docs: translate cesql/cesql_tck/README.md to zh-CN
                    ......
```

## How to translate

### Step 1. Choose a document to translate 

A translator can find a document to translate by filtering issues based on 
`{language-code}-translation` label.

Comment the issue to ask reviewers to assign the task to you.

You're expected to finish translation within one week. The task can be assigned to
others after one week.

> ### Step 2. submit your translation

Reviewer: s/submit/Submit

Reviewer: Or ignore these comments, and change step 1 to "choose". We just need to be consistent.

A translator must submit translation via a Pull Request(PR). See details in how to 
[submit a Pull Request](../community/CONTRIBUTING.md#suggesting-a-change).

> ### Step 3. edit your translation

Reviewer: s/edit/Edit/
